Hosting models/render modes & What's New 8.0 (#30279)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/blazor/components/render-modes.md

* `AddWebAssemblyComponents` adds services to support rendering interactive WebAssembly components.

<!-- UPDATE 8.0 HOLD
     <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.WebAssemblyRazorComponentsBuilderExtensions.AddWebAssemblyComponents%2A>
-->

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorComponentsEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorComponents%2A> discovers available components and specifies the root component for the app, which by default is the `App` component (`App.razor`).

Endpoint convention builder extensions:

* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorComponentEndpointConventionBuilder.AddServerRenderMode%2A> configures the Server render mode for the app.
* `AddWebAssemblyRenderMode` configures the WebAssembly render mode for the app.

<!-- UPDATE 8.0 HOLD
    <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebAssemblyRazorComponentsEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.AddWebAssemblyRenderMode%2A>
-->

> [!NOTE]
> For orientation on the placement of the API in the following examples, inspect the `Program` file of an app generated from the Blazor Web App project template. For guidance on how to create a Blazor Web App, see <xref:blazor/tooling>.

> Example 1: The following `Program` file API adds services and a render mode for Razor components with only server-side rendering support:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example 1: The following `Program` file API adds services and configuration for enabling the Server render mode:
```

```csharp
builder.Services.AddRazorComponents()
    .AddServerComponents();
```

```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddServerRenderMode();
```

> Example 2: The following `Program` file API adds services and a render mode for Razor components with only client-side rendering support:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example 2: The following `Program` file API adds services and configuration for enabling the WebAssembly render mode:
```

```csharp
builder.Services.AddRazorComponents()
    .AddWebAssemblyComponents();
```

```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddWebAssemblyRenderMode();
```

> Example 3: The following `Program` file API adds services and render modes for Razor components with both server-side and client-side rendering support:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example 3: The following `Program` file API adds services and configuration for enabling both the Server and WebAssembly render modes as well as the Auto render mode:
```

```csharp
builder.Services.AddRazorComponents()
    .AddServerComponents()
    .AddWebAssemblyComponents();
```

```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddServerRenderMode()
    .AddWebAssemblyRenderMode();
```

## Apply a render mode to a component instance

To apply a render mode to a component instance use the [`@rendermode` Razor directive attribute](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute) where the component is used.

> > [!NOTE]
> > Component authors should typically design components to support any render mode or hosting model. Components should avoid assumptions on where they are running (server or client) and should degrade gracefully when rendered statically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> > [!NOTE]
> > Component authors should typically design components to support any render mode or hosting model. Components should avoid assumptions on where they are running (server or client) and should degrade gracefully when rendered statically.
> 

Reviewer: I realized this note makes less sense here where we're talking about using components, not authoring them.

```suggestion
```

In the following example, the Server render mode is applied to the `Dialog` component instance:

<!-- UPDATE 8.0 RC2: Remove preview remark and update code -->

```razor
<Dialog @rendermode="new ServerRenderMode()" />
```

> [!NOTE]
> During .NET 8 *Release Candidate 1*, use the following values:
>
> Render mode | Value
> ----------- | -----
> Server      | `new ServerRenderMode()`
> WebAssembly | `new WebAssemblyRenderMode()`
> Auto        | `new AutoRenderMode()`
>
> The preceding syntax will be simplified in an upcoming preview release.

## Apply a render mode to a component definition

To specify the render mode for a component as part of its definition, use the [`@attribute` Razor directive](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute) and the corresponding render mode attribute.

```razor
@page "{ROUTE}"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]
```

> Applying a render mode to a component definition is commonly used when applying a render mode to a specific page. Routable pages by default use the same render mode as the router component that rendered the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the preceding example, the `{ROUTE}` placeholder is the route template.

Applying a render mode to a component definition is commonly used when applying a render mode to a specific page. Routable pages by default use the same render mode as the router component that rendered the page.
```

> [!NOTE]

> > Component authors should typically design components to support any render mode or hosting model. Components should avoid assumptions on where they are running (server or client) and should degrade gracefully when rendered statically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Component authors should avoid coupling a component's implementation to a specific render mode. Instead, component authors should typically design components to support any render mode or hosting model. A component's implementation should avoid assumptions on where it is running (server or client) and should degrade gracefully when rendered statically. Specifying the render mode in the component definition may be needed if the component is not instantiated directly (like with a routable page component) or to specify a render mode for all component instances.
```

> In the preceding example, the `{ROUTE}` placeholder is the route template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> During .NET 8 *Release Candidate 1*, use the following attributes:
>
> Render mode | Value
> ----------- | -----
> Server      | `[RenderModeServer`
> WebAssembly | `RenderModeWebAssembly`
> Auto        | `RenderModeAuto`
>
> The preceding syntax will be simplified in an upcoming preview release.
```

## Prerendering

<!-- UPDATE 8.0 RC2: Remove preview remark and update code -->

Prerendering is enabled by default for interactive components.

To disable prerendering, pass the `prerender` flag with a value of `false`.

> For a routable page:
> 
> ```razor
> @page "{ROUTE}"
> @attribute [RenderModeServer(prerender: false)]
> ```
> 
> In the preceding example, the `{ROUTE}` placeholder is the route template.
> 
> For a non-routable, non-page component:
> 
> ```razor
> <Dialog @rendermode="new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false)" />
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a component instance:

```razor
<Dialog @rendermode="new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false)" />
```

From the component definition:

```razor
@page "{ROUTE}"
@attribute [RenderModeServer(prerender: false)]
```

In the preceding example, the `{ROUTE}` placeholder is the route template.
```

> [!NOTE]
> During .NET 8 *Release Candidate 1*, use the following values:
>
> Render mode | Value
> ----------- | -----
> Server      | `new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false)`
> WebAssembly | `new WebAssemblyRenderMode(prerender: false)`
> Auto        | `new AutoRenderMode(prerender: false)`
>
> The preceding syntax will be simplified in an upcoming preview release.

## Static render mode

> By default components use the Static render mode. The component renders to the response stream and interactivity isn't enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, components use the Static render mode. The component renders to the response stream and interactivity isn't enabled.
```

## Server render mode

The Server render mode renders the component interactively from the server using Blazor Server. User interactions are handled over a real-time connection with the browser. The circuit connection is established when the Server component is rendered.

In the following example, the render mode is set to Server by adding `@attribute [RenderModeServer]` to the component definition. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is rerendered to update the message in the UI.

`RenderMode2.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-2"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the server-side project's `Components/Pages` folder. The server-side project is the solution's project with a name that doesn't end in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-2` in the browser's address bar.

> ## Client render mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## WebAssembly render mode
```

> The Client render mode renders the component interactively on the client using Blazor WebAssembly. The .NET runtime and app bundle are downloaded when the WebAssembly component is initially rendered and is cached for future use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Client render mode renders the component interactively on the client using Blazor WebAssembly. The .NET runtime and app bundle are downloaded and cached when the WebAssembly component is initially rendered.
```

> In the following example, the render mode is set to use the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model with `@attribute [RenderModeWebAssembly]`. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is rerendered to update the message in the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the render mode is set to WebAssembly with `@attribute [RenderModeWebAssembly]`. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is rerendered to update the message in the UI.
```

-->

> [!NOTE]
> For orientation on the placement of the API in the following examples, inspect the `Program` file of an app generated from the Blazor Web App project template. For guidance on how to create a Blazor Web App, see <xref:blazor/tooling>.

Example 1: The following `Program` file API adds services and configuration for enabling the Server render mode:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddRazorComponents()
    .AddServerComponents();
```

```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddServerRenderMode();
```

Example 2: The following `Program` file API adds services and configuration for enabling the WebAssembly render mode:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddRazorComponents()
    .AddWebAssemblyComponents();
```

```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddWebAssemblyRenderMode();
```

Example 3: The following `Program` file API adds services and configuration for enabling the Server, WebAssembly, and Auto render modes:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddRazorComponents()
    .AddServerComponents()
    .AddWebAssemblyComponents();
```

```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddServerRenderMode()
    .AddWebAssemblyRenderMode();
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Blazor downloads and executes components that use the WebAssembly render mode client-side in the browser using the Blazor WebAssembly hosting model. A separate client project is needed to setup Blazor WebAssembly hosting for these components. The client project contains the startup code for the Blazor WebAssembly host and sets up the .NET runtime needed for running in a browser. The Blazor Web App template will add this client project for you when you select the option to enable client interactivity. Any components using the WebAssembly render mode should be built from the client project do they get included in the downloaded app bundle.

```

## Apply a render mode to a component instance

To apply a render mode to a component instance use the [`@rendermode` Razor directive attribute](xref:mvc/views/razor#attribute) where the component is used.

In the following example, the Server render mode is applied to the `Dialog` component instance:

<!-- UPDATE 8.0 RC2: Remove preview remark and update code -->

```razor

> <Dialog @rendermode="new ServerRenderMode()" />

Reviewer: The Razor compiler doesn't know about the `@rendermode` directive yet, so it doesn't know the attribute value should C#. This means you currently need switch to C# by leading with an `@`. Also, the `RenderMode` type has convenient members for specifying the render modes.

```suggestion
<Dialog @rendermode="@RenderMode.Server" />
```

```

> [!NOTE]
> During .NET 8 *Release Candidate 1*, use the following values:
>
> Render mode | Value
> ----------- | -----

> > Server      | `new ServerRenderMode()`
> > WebAssembly | `new WebAssemblyRenderMode()`
> > Auto        | `new AutoRenderMode()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Server      | `@RenderMode.Server`
> WebAssembly | `@RenderMode.WebAssembly`
> Auto        | `@RenderMode.Auto`
```

> [!NOTE]
> Component authors should avoid coupling a component's implementation to a specific render mode. Instead, component authors should typically design components to support any render mode or hosting model. A component's implementation should avoid assumptions on where it's running (server or client) and should degrade gracefully when rendered statically. Specifying the render mode in the component definition may be needed if the component isn't instantiated directly (such as with a routable page component) or to specify a render mode for all component instances.

> [!NOTE]
> During .NET 8 *Release Candidate 1*, use the following attributes:
>
> Render mode | Value
> ----------- | -----
> Server      | `[RenderModeServer`
> WebAssembly | `[RenderModeWebAssembly]`
> Auto        | `[RenderModeAuto]`
>
> The preceding syntax will be simplified in an upcoming preview release.

## Prerendering

<!-- UPDATE 8.0 RC2: Remove preview remark and update code -->

Prerendering is enabled by default for interactive components.

To disable prerendering, pass the `prerender` flag with a value of `false`.

For a component instance:

```razor

> <Dialog @rendermode="new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false)" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Dialog @rendermode="@(new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false))" />
```

```

From the component definition:

```razor
@page "{ROUTE}"
@attribute [RenderModeServer(prerender: false)]
```

In the preceding example, the `{ROUTE}` placeholder is the route template.

> [!NOTE]
> During .NET 8 *Release Candidate 1*, use the following values:
>
> Render mode | Value
> ----------- | -----

> > Server      | `new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false)`
> > WebAssembly | `new WebAssemblyRenderMode(prerender: false)`
> > Auto        | `new AutoRenderMode(prerender: false)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Server      | `@(new ServerRenderMode(prerender: false))`
> WebAssembly | `@(new WebAssemblyRenderMode(prerender: false))`
> Auto        | `@(new AutoRenderMode(prerender: false))`
```

The Server render mode renders the component interactively from the server using Blazor Server. User interactions are handled over a real-time connection with the browser. The circuit connection is established when the Server component is rendered.

In the following example, the render mode is set to Server by adding `@attribute [RenderModeServer]` to the component definition. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is rerendered to update the message in the UI.

`RenderMode2.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-2"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the server-side project's `Components/Pages` folder. The server-side project is the solution's project with a name that doesn't end in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-2` in the browser's address bar.

## WebAssembly render mode

> The WebAssembly render mode renders the component interactively on the client using Blazor WebAssembly. The .NET runtime and app bundle are downloaded and cached when the WebAssembly component is initially rendered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The WebAssembly render mode renders the component interactively on the client using Blazor WebAssembly. The .NET runtime and app bundle are downloaded and cached when the WebAssembly component is initially rendered. Components using the WebAssembly render mode must be built from a separate client project that sets up the Blazor WebAssembly host.
```

In the following example, the render mode is set to WebAssembly with `@attribute [RenderModeWebAssembly]`. The button calls the `UpdateMessage` method when selected. The value of `message` changes, and the component is rerendered to update the message in the UI.

`RenderMode3.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-3"
@attribute [RenderModeWebAssembly]

<button @onclick="UpdateMessage">Click me</button> @message

@code {
    private string message = "Not clicked yet.";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

If using the preceding component locally in a Blazor Web App, place the component in the client-side project's `Pages` folder. The client-side project is the solution's project with a name that ends in `.Client`. When the app is running, navigate to `/render-mode-3` in the browser's address bar.

## Auto render mode

> The Auto render mode determines how to render the component at runtime. The component is initially rendered server-side with interactivity using the Blazor Server hosting model. The .NET runtime and app bundle are downloaded to the client in the background and cached so that they can be used on future visits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Auto render mode determines how to render the component at runtime. The component is initially rendered server-side with interactivity using the Blazor Server hosting model. The .NET runtime and app bundle are downloaded to the client in the background and cached so that they can be used on future visits. Components using the Auto render mode must be built from a separate client project that sets up the Blazor WebAssembly host.
```

In the following example, the `SharedMessage` component is interactive over a SignalR connection to the client. The button calls `UpdateMessage`, and the message is updated.

`PassedRenderMode2.razor`:

```razor
@page "/passed-render-mode-2"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]

<SharedMessage />
```

### A parent component with two child sibling component that use different render modes

### A negative case of a child component that tries to use a different interactive render mode than its parent, which results in an error

### A parent component with an interactive child component that takes a parameter that is serializable (works)

### A negative case of an interactive child component that has a non-serializable component parameter, like child content or a render fragment, which results in an error.

-----> Show that you can sometimes work around this by wrapping the child component in another component that doesn't have the parameter. This is what we do in the Blazor Web App template with the Routes component to wrap the Blazor Router.

## Set the render mode for the entire app

<!-- UPDATE 8.0 RC2: Remove preview remark and update code -->

> To set the render mode for the entire app, indicate the render mode at the highest level component in the app's component hierarchy, typically the `Routes` component (`Components/App.razor`) for apps based on the Blazor Web App project template:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set the render mode for the entire app, indicate the render mode at the highest-level component in the app's component hierarchy that isn't a root component (root components cannot be interactive). Typically, this will be the `Routes` component (`Components/App.razor`) for apps based on the Blazor Web App project template:
```

```razor

> <Routes @rendermode="new ServerRenderMode()" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Routes @rendermode="@(new ServerRenderMode())" />
```

```

> [!NOTE]
> The preceding syntax will be simplified in an upcoming preview release.

The Blazor router propagates its render mode to the pages it routes. The pages aren't technically child components of the router, but when the routes are discovered at runtime for the router, they inherit the router's render mode.

You also typically must set the same interactive render mode on the `HeadOutlet` component, which is also found in the `App` component of a Blazor Web App generated from the project template:

```

> <HeadOutlet @rendermode="new ServerRenderMode()" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<HeadOutlet @rendermode="@RenderMode.Server" />
```

    [Parameter]
    public string Greeting { get; set; } = "Hello!";

    private void UpdateMessage()
    {
        message = "Somebody clicked me!";
    }
}
```

### Render mode inheritance

If the `SharedMessage` component is placed in a statically-rendered parent component, the `SharedMessage` component is also rendered statically and isn't interactive. The button doesn't call `UpdateMessage`, and the message isn't updated.

`RenderMode5.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-5"

<SharedMessage />
```

If the `SharedMessage` component is placed in a component that defines the render mode, it inherits the applied render mode.

In the following example, the `SharedMessage` component is interactive over a SignalR connection to the client. The button calls `UpdateMessage`, and the message is updated.

`RenderMode6.razor`:

```razor
@page "/render-mode-6"
@attribute [RenderModeServer]

<SharedMessage />
```

### Child components with different render modes

In the following example:

* The first `SharedMessage` child component is interactive with Server rendering. The component immediately appears and is interactive when the page is displayed in the browser.

> * The second `SharedMessage` child component is interactive with WebAssembly rendering. The component is rendered and interactive *after* the Blazor app bundle is downloaded and the .NET runtime is active on the client.

Reviewer: This bullet is a bit ambiguous about whether the component is rendered before or after the app and runtime get loaded on the client.

Both components should immediately appear because they are prerendered. The first will be interactive once the circuit is established, which is usually pretty quick. The second will be interactive after the runtime and app bundle have been downloaded and loaded.
